(light ambient music)
Instructor: So in this example,
let's assume A is sending a frame to D.
So the source address at layer two will be A
and the destination address will be D.
A will send the frame to switch one,
switch one will then copy that frame to all ports
based once again, on the switch architecture
the central ASIC will check the destination
in the cam table.
And let's assume for the moment that D is not
in switch one's cam table or MAC address table.
So the frame will attempt to go out of this port zero two
but because the internal tag color is red for that frame
and this is a green port
the frame is not permitted out of zero two.
However, on this port, because it's a trunk link
and let's assume for the moment that all VLANs are allowed
across this trunk, that frame will be sent
out of port zero three to switch two.
However, just before the frame is sent out
it needs to be tagged with the VLAN number.
So in this case, the VLAN identifier would be red.
Now, as mentioned in switches
VLANs are identified by numbers.
But to keep these examples simple, we're gonna use colors.
So this would in actual fact be a number from zero to 4,096.
That frame is then sent
across the trunk to switch two, who then receives the frame.
Once again, the frame is processed internally.
Now this switch reads the VLAN identifier in the
802.1Q header and sees that it belongs to the red VLAN,
that is tagged internally within the switch.
The frame is sent to all ports,
zero two as well as zero one.
And let's assume once again that the MAC address table
of switch two does not contain the Mac address of D.
So when the frame is attempting to go out of port zero one
it is denied because the color
of the frame is red and this interface is
in the green VLAN, so the frame is dropped.
However, out of this interface, the frame is permitted
because the port is in the red VLAN
and the frame is tagged with the red VLAN.
All tagging is stripped out of this port
so it's sent as a normal ethernet frame to PC D.
Once again, the PCs are oblivious
to the fact that they have been put into VLANs.
They just see standard ethernet.
So a standard frame with a source address
of A, destination address D is transmitted
out of port zero two and processed by the PC.
802.1Q trunks have a special VLAN known
as the native VLAN.
Native VLANs are untagged, when not port
on the switch is set up as a trunk.
For instance, this interface on switch one and switch two
that interface can receive and transmit tagged frames.
Frames belonging to the native VLAN do not
carry VLAN tags when sent over this trunk.
By the same token
if an untagged frame were received on this trunk port
that frame would automatically be associated
with a native VLAN for this port.
Now specific management traffic will go
across the native VLAN.
So for instance
spanning tree BPDUs will use the native VLAN
and so will dynamic trunking protocol.
Dynamic trunking protocol is a way that switches
negotiate to set up a trunk between themselves automatically
and I'll show you an example of that in a moment.
Certain management traffic always uses VLAN 1.
If you have left VLAN 1 as the native VLAN,
traffic like CDP, VTP, PAGP and UDLD will be transmitted
across the native VLAN untagged.
If however, the native VLAN is changed to something other
than VLAN 1, these protocols will then be tagged
in that specific VLAN, CDP was explained
in the ICND 1 portion of this course.
It allows us to view directly connected devices
VLAN trunking protocol.
We're gonna discuss in the next few slides.
It is a way to dynamically update other switches
with changes made on a single switch in a VTP domain.
PAGP or port aggregation protocol is a protocol used
for the automatic creation of Ether channels and UDLD
or unidirectional link detection is used to
monitor the physical configuration of cables
between devices and detect unidirectional links.
This allows us to detect incorrectly cabled links.
The important thing to take note
of here is that on trunk links, there's a special VLAN known
as the native VLAN where traffic is sent untagged.
If left at the default of VLAN 1, a lot
of management traffic will be sent across that native VLAN.
It's important that the native VLAN
on both sides of the trunk be the same.
If they're not set the same, the switches will notify you
by telling you that there's a native VLAN mismatch.
The issue that arises
if the native VLANs are not the same is
that traffic from one VLAN
on this switch will automatically be associated
and end up in a different VLAN on another switch.
And obviously the whole concept
of VLANs is to separate traffic into a specific VLAN.
In other words, a separate broadcast domain
or separate subnet, traffic from one VLAN
should not end up in another VLAN
because of a native VLAN misconfiguration.
Now this is something you probably not see
in networks today.
In theory, with a native VLAN, a switch
like switch one could send tagged frames to switch two
and untagged frames to this MacBook.
So by using the native VLAN, this MacBook
or a PC would still be able to communicate with a network
even though it doesn't understand tagged frames.
802.1Q frames
or tagged frames are useful communicating VLAN information
between networking devices like switches.
This end device wouldn't necessarily understand
802.1Q frames, but could still communicate
with a network by using the native VLAN.
However, that's not common today.
What is more typical today is a scenario
like this where you have a PC connected
to an IP phone connected to a Cisco switch.
Now Cisco IP phone has a built-in three way switch.
One port is connected back to the network infrastructure.
So our Cisco switch, a second port allows the PC to connect
to the infrastructure through the phone
and a third port allows for voice traffic
from the handset to be prioritized
over data when sent to the network infrastructure.
So the phone has a built-in three-way switch
always prioritizing voice over data.
The thing to take note of here though is
that the phone can be configured
in a separate VLAN to the PC.
So the phone could be in the red VLAN
and the PC could be in the green VLAN.
There are a lot of advantages to doing it this way.
Firstly, from a security point of view
this PC will not be able to sniff voice traffic
and therefore listening on the voice conversation.
Now, there are a lot of caveats relating
to Cisco phones and different models are set up
different ways, but in theory, the concept is
that the phone is in a separate VLAN to the PC
and therefore the PC is not able to see the voice traffic.
There are applications like Cane Enable, which is
a very powerful hacking tool that allow you to
sniff the network, capture the voice traffic
and then replay that traffic as a web file
on your local PC, so you can replay the voice conversation.
But if the phone is in a separate VLAN, security is enhanced
because the PC is not able to see the voice traffic
from a quality of service point of view.
This is also a lot better
because it's easier to prioritize the voice traffic
over the data traffic if it's in a separate VLAN.
Setting up your network this way also has the advantages
of easier IP address management
because you can assign a separate subnet to your phones
versus your PCs and thus scale your IP addressing.
So what happens is the switch is configured
with what's called a voice VLAN and a native VLAN.
The voice VLAN is tagged, so tagged frames get sent
to the phone and the phone
with its built-in three-way switch is able to
read the 802.1Q frames.
Untagged frames are sent
on what's called the native VLAN or data VLAN.
That information is sent to the phone
and the phone just switches that to the PC.
So the PC receives the untagged or native VLAN frames
and the phone receives the tagged or voice VLAN frames.
No configuration on the phone is necessary to enable this.
You literally type a few commands
on the switch telling the switch what the voice VLAN is
and what the data VLAN is, and this happens automatically
because when the phones boot up, they query the switch
through CDP to find out which VLAN they belong to.
So the switch updates, the phone's configuration
through the use of CDP.
So this is a very common implementation
of native VLANs in the real world today.
So just to sum up, our ports are assigned to VLANs.
Firstly, they can be statically assigned by an administrator
so use an administrator, go onto an interface
and statically put that port into a VLAN.
The second option is to create what are
called dynamic VLANs.
Using a VLAN membership policy server,
dynamic VLANs allow
for a ports VLAN to be dynamically updated based
on the MAC address of the device attached to that port.
So in a boardroom, for example, when a director plugs
in a laptop based on the Mac address of that laptop
that port is dynamically assigned to the director's VLAN.
When a manager plugs his laptop
into that same port the next day, for example
that VLAN is automatically updated to the manager's VLAN.
So based on the source Mac address
of frames received on the port
the port is automatically assigned to different VLANs.
And lastly, we have voice VLANs
which are used specifically for IP phones.
VTP or VLAN trunking protocol is a Cisco
proprietary layer two protocol, which allows
for the propagation of VLAN information from one switch
to another rather than tail netting to multiple switches.
You can create, delete or rename VLANs on one switch
and have that information automatically propagated
to other switches across trunk links.
Notice the name, VLAN trunking protocol.
This information can only be propagated across trunk links.
Now, VTP can save you a lot of time
but as a lot of Cisco engineers will tell you
VTP can cause you a lot of headaches.
Switches can have the entire VLAN configuration wiped
out if a new switch is added
to the network without following a proper procedure.
So a lot of Cisco engineers will not enable VTP
in modern environments because
of the inherent risks associated with this protocol.
VTP messages are sent to the following MAC address
which is a well-known multicast address for flooding
of the CDP and VTP protocols.
There are three types of messages in VTP.
You have summary advertisements, subset advertisements
and advertisement requests.
And I'll explain each of these
in more detail in the upcoming slides, but please be aware
that there are three message types.
When setting up VTP, devices will by default belong
to the null domain.
For VTP to work, you need to configure
and put the devices into a specific VTP domain.
Only devices within the same VTP domain will be updated
with VLAN information.
A switch can only be configured
in a single VTP domain at any given time.
By default, Cisco switches are in the null domain
or no management domain until they receive an advertisement
for a domain over a trunk link
or until you manually configure a management domain.
So in this example, let's assume
that these devices have been put
into the VTP domain with the name of Cisco.
Remember that VTP is a layer two protocol
and requires trunk links for communication.
So VTP will not traverse a rider.
An important concept to understand
in VTP is the concept of a revision number.
Every time a change is made to the VLAN database
the revision number in VTP will increment by one.
So let's assume that all devices
in this topology have a revision number of one.
You as an administrator add a VLAN
let's say VLAN 3 to this switch.
Its revision number will then increment
from revision number one to revision number two.
That information will then be advertised
to all other switches in the VTP domain
so that they can synchronize their databases
to the latest revision number, which is revision number two.
So the switch at the top will send what is
called A VTP summary advertisement to all other switches
informing them that a change has been made.
Remember, this is sent using a multicast address
so all of these devices will see that message.
They will then request the latest information
using an advertisement request, and the switch
at the top will send them detailed information
about the change using a subset advertisement.
The net result is that the revision numbers and all
of these switches will increment to the same revision number
as the switch where the change was made.
So VLAN 3 will appear
in all the databases of these switches
and the revision number will be set to revision number two.
The whole concept with VTP is
that you can make changes on an individual device.
As those changes are made, all other switches are informed
of the change and they will synchronize their databases
to the latest revision number so that they end up
having the same VLANs in their VLAN databases.
That means that you as the administrator
only need to make changes
on one switch rather than five switches in this topology.
Please note ports are put
into individual VLANs by, for example, an administrator.
VTP does not put ports into individual VLANs.
It just updates the VLAN database
so that the switches know which VLANs exist.
You as an administrators still need to put those ports
into the relevant VLANs.
So this is just a VLAN database update mechanism
so that switches know the VLANs that exist in the topology.
So let's look at the VTP messages in more detail.
The first type of VTP message is a summary advertisement.
This is sent every five minutes
or whenever there's a change.
So whenever an administrator makes a change
on a switch by, for instance, adding a VLAN
a summary advertisement will be sent
out on the well-known multicast address
to all other switches in the domain.
So this is used to inform other switches
of the current VTP domain
and the current configuration revision number.
So as an example, on switch one
the administrator adds another VLAN.
Let's say VLAN 4
the revision number will be incremented.
So if the revision number was three
it would now be incremented to four.
This switch will send a summary advertisement
to all neighboring switches informing them
of the current VTP domain
and the new configuration revision number
switches that receive that summary advertisement will then
send back a summary request asking
for detailed information of the changes that have been made.
There are three situations when summary requests are used.
Firstly, when a switch has been reset
or when the VTP domain name has been changed,
or when the switch has received a VTP summary advertisement
with a higher configuration revision number than its own.
So because switch two received a summary advertisement
from switch one indicating a high revision number
in other words, the revision number
on switch one is revision number four
and the revision number
on switch two is revision number three.
Switch two will now request information
from switch one so that it can update its database
with the latest VLAN information.
That detailed information is sent from switch one
to switch two using what's called a subset advertisement.
This contains a list of VLAN information
and if there are several VLANs,
more than one subset advertisement may be required to update
and synchronize the databases of other switches.
So essentially what this is is detailed information
of the changes that have been made.
The summary advertisement just informs the switch
in summary format of the latest revision number
and VTP domain.
If the local switch sees that it's out of date
it'll request detailed information so
that it can synchronize its database and that
information will be provided using a subset advertisement.
The switches now are able to synchronize their
local databases to the database
of the switch with the latest information.
Now there are three modes in VTP.
The default mode is server.
A VTP switch in server mode can create VLANs
modify VLANs and delete VLANs.
It also sends and forwards advertisements.
So if it received an advertisement from another switch
it would forward that on.
If you made changes on the local switch
it would send summary advertisements.
It would also synchronize its local database
to the latest revision number, and it also
saves the VLAN configuration information locally.
So this is the device where you're gonna make your changes.
Multiple switches can be configured as VTP servers
but you need to be really careful with this.
The second mode is VTP client.
A VTP client cannot create, change or delete VLANs.
It is also able to send and forward advertisements
so it can send any VLANs currently listed
in its database to other VTP switches.
It can also forward advertisements received
from other switches.
Thirdly, it would also synchronize its database
to the latest configuration revision number.
This is a major potential issue
with VTP and has burnt many Cisco engineers in the past.
A lot of Cisco engineers will not use VTP
because of this issue.
So here's a sample topology.
Notice we have a VTP server
and let's assume that all of these switches
at the top are configured as VTP clients.
The host machines are in the red VLAN or green VLAN
and currently the revision number
for the domain is revision number two.
So the latest configuration revision number is two.
The VTP domain is Cisco
and the VLANs that have been configured
on the switches of VLANs red and green.
Please note once again
that the switches have a VLAN database.
That is what VTP updates.
The individual ports on the switches need to manually be put
in the correct VLANs.
Now, someone plugs another switch
into the topology, from, for instance, a lab environment.
The reason why this is dangerous is that
in a lab environment, VLANs may have been added and removed
and thus the revision number may be a lot higher
than the production network.
So let's assume for the moment
that the revision number is 50
this switch only has the blue VLAN configured on it.
So the green and red VLANs do not exist
in the VLAN database.
A lot of people make the mistake of assuming
that as long as the switch is configured as a VTP client
it'll not cause any problems on the network.
So an administrator plugs in the switch
and configures this port as a trunk.
Please note once again
that VTP advertisements are only sent across trunk ports.
So let's assume that throughout the network
all of these links are configured as trunks.
As soon as this client is added to the VTP domain.
And what's really scary is
that this client can be automatically updated
with the VTP information.
In other words, if it's configured with a null domain
it can automatically join the current VTP domain of Cisco.
And as soon as that happens
the devices will synchronize their databases
to the latest configuration revision number
which in this case is 50.
So in all switches in the live domain
the revision numbers change to 50
because all of the switches, including the VTP server
will synchronize automatically to the VTP client.
The current VLANs red and green
are automatically removed from the VLAN database
and the only VLAN that will now be available
in the VLAN databases of all of these switches is VLAN blue.
Now all of the ports
on all the switches that have manually been put
into the green or red VLAN are error disabled.
The issue here is that a port belongs to the red VLAN
but the red VLAN does not exist in the database.
So the port is automatically error disabled.
That means
that no traffic can be central received on this port
and the same thing happens on all other switches.
Essentially what happens is
that the entire network is brought down
by the introduction of the single switch.
That's extremely worrying to say the least
that the introduction of a single switch can bring
down an entire enterprise network.
The only way to fix this is to physically connect
to the VTP server
and then manually add the VLANs that have been deleted.
(light ambient music)